Question:

Hey @Austen Sorochak,

For the Folger Deep hydrophone, one of the data types is a .fft.gz file. Do you have a product definition for it, that defines the averaging/scaling convention, and whether any high-pass or noise-floor subtraction is applied in product generation? We're seeing some unexplained low frequency differences between that product and the larger .wav files, but would really like to be able to use the smaller .fft.gz file for our analysis.

For the same station (ICLISTEN HF1266), do you know if it is possible to get the "256 kHz sensitivity curve"? The file I can find stops at 51.2 kHz, which leaves ~200 of the bins in the .fft.gz file uncalibrated.

This is all for the most recent deployment (~2020 to 2026)




Answer:

The fft file is a bit of a black box because it is generated by the manufacturer of the hydrophone and the documentation is not great. I have also noticed spectral differences between the fft files and spectrograms generated from the .wav (or .flac) files, so I believe there is sometimes filtering applied to the fft files for some reason.

Using the original audio files is your best bet because then you have full control over the settings used to generate your spectrograms, but I know those are much larger files. My next best recommendation would be to use Oceans 3.0 to generate spectrogram .mat files as a data product (make sure you specify either spectrogram or full resolution). It will take some time to process on Oceans 3.0 but the files themselves would be much smaller.

The sensitivity curve upper frequency limit is based on the sample rate used for the audio (.flac) files. If the upper limit in the sensitivity file is 51.2 kHz that implies the audio is sampled at 128 kHz. The fft files always use 256 kHz sample rate which is why there are some bins higher than the sensitivity file when using the fft files.

In theory we likely have the sensitivity data up to 256 kHz from the manufacturer so I could provide it, but the fft files are calibrated differently so it wouldn't be applicable to those files. Again this is because the fft files are a proprietary black-box format produced by the hydrophone manufacturer

Strictly speaking for that goal you don't really need calibrated sound levels anyway. E.g. you could just do something like build a simple "detector" that looks at the sound level at ~100 Hz (many ships generate significant energy around this band). When ships are nearby the level at this band will likely be significantly elevated compared to ambient conditions. The absolute calibrated level isn't necessary for that to work.

The fft files are essentially uncalibrated unless you have all the metadata from Ocean Sonics to go along with it, which I don't believe ONC currently publishes

If you want calibrated levels, I'd suggest using the .mat files or generating your own spectrograms from the .wav files

For specifically targeting smaller vessels. not ships, you may have to change the band you're looking at depending on vessel size, but the same concept holds.